KB: Add filesystem scanning and repairing HOWTO (#35)
harvester/harvesterhci.io: kb/2023-02-01/scan_and_repair_filesystem.md

---
title: Scan and Repair Root Filesystem of VirtualMachine
description: Scan and repair root filesystem of VM
slug: scan-and-repair-vm-root-filesystem
authors:
  - name: Vicente Cheng
    title: Senior Software Engineer
    url: https://github.com/Vicente-Cheng
    image_url: https://github.com/Vicente-Cheng.png
tags: [storage, longhorn, root, filesystem]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

> In the early version of harvester (v1.0.3 and before versions), the longhorn volume sometimes corrupts when rebuilt (reference: [Analysis: Potential Data/Filesystem Corruption](https://longhorn.io/kb/troubleshooting-volume-filesystem-corruption/#solution)). In the harvester v1.1.0 and later versions, the longhorn team already fix this problem. Therefore, you could scan your filesystem of the VM by following the steps and repairing it (if needed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In earlier versions of Harvester (v1.0.3 and prior), Longhorn volumes sometimes get corrupted when rebuilding (reference: [Analysis: Potential Data/Filesystem Corruption](https://longhorn.io/kb/troubleshooting-volume-filesystem-corruption/#solution)). In Harvester v1.1.0 and later versions, the Longhorn team has fixed this problem. So, you can follow the steps below to scan the VM's filesystem and repair it if needed.

```

## Stop The VM And Backup Volume

> Before we scan the filesystem, we recommend you back up your volume. For example, refer to the following steps to stop the VM and backup the volumes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we scan the filesystem, we recommend you back up the volume first. For example, refer to the following steps to stop the VM and backup the volume.
```

- Find the target VM

![finding the target VM](./imgs/finding_the_target_vm.png)

- Stop the target VM

![Stop the target VM](./imgs/stop_the_target_vm.png)

> Now, the VM stopped, and related volumes are detached. Then we go to the longhorn UI to backup this volume.

Author: Yes, we could do that. But we still need to go to the LH UI to attach and detach manually. I thought that would be more consistent for combining the operations like snapshot -> attach -> scan/repair -> detach on LH UI. WDUT?

> Now, the VM stopped, and related volumes are detached. Then we go to the longhorn UI to backup this volume.

Reviewer 2: test

> Now, the VM stopped, and related volumes are detached. Then we go to the longhorn UI to backup this volume.

Author: @guangbochen, friendly ping. WDUT for this?

---
title: Scan and Repair Root Filesystem of VirtualMachine
description: Scan and repair root filesystem of VM
slug: scan-and-repair-vm-root-filesystem
authors:
  - name: Vicente Cheng
    title: Senior Software Engineer
    url: https://github.com/Vicente-Cheng
    image_url: https://github.com/Vicente-Cheng.png
tags: [storage, longhorn, root, filesystem]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

> In earlier versions of Harvester (v1.0.3 and prior), Longhorn volumes sometimes get corrupted when rebuilding (reference: [Analysis: Potential Data/Filesystem Corruption](https://longhorn.io/kb/troubleshooting-volume-filesystem-corruption/#solution)). In Harvester v1.1.0 and later versions, the Longhorn team has fixed this problem. So, you can follow the steps below to scan the VM's filesystem and repair it if needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In earlier versions of Harvester (v1.0.3 and prior), Longhorn volumes sometimes get corrupted when rebuilding (reference: [Analysis: Potential Data/Filesystem Corruption](https://longhorn.io/kb/troubleshooting-volume-filesystem-corruption/#solution)). In Harvester v1.1.0 and later versions, the Longhorn team has fixed this problem. This article covers the steps you can take to scan the VM's filesystem and repair it if needed.
```

Author: Hi @LucasSaintarbor, the first half of the sentences changed the original meaning.
I would like to present that the old version longhorn sometime makes replicas corrupted when rebuilding.
How would we improve the sentences here?

Reviewer 2: Hi @Vicente-Cheng, thanks for the feedback, is the first sentence correct? Does it summarize the issue?

## Stop The VM And Backup Volume

> Before we scan the filesystem, we recommend you back up the volume first. For example, refer to the following steps to stop the VM and backup the volume.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before you scan the filesystem, it is recommend you back up the volume first. For an example, refer to the following steps to stop the VM and backup the volume.
```

> - Find the target VM

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Find the target VM.
```

> - Find the target VM

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Find the target VM.
```

![finding the target VM](./imgs/finding_the_target_vm.png)

> - Stop the target VM

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Stop the target VM.
```

![Stop the target VM](./imgs/stop_the_target_vm.png)

> Now, the VM stopped, and related volumes are detached. Then we go to the longhorn UI to backup this volume.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The target VM is now stopped and the related volumes are detached. Now go to the Longhorn UI to backup this volume.
```

> - Enable `Developer Tools & Features` (Preferences -> Enable Developer Tools & Features)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Enable `Developer Tools & Features` (Preferences -> Enable Developer Tools & Features).
```

![Preferences then enable developer mode](./imgs/preferences_enable_developer_mode.png)
![Enable the developer mode](./imgs/enable_the_developer_mode.png)

> - Go to edit config page of VM

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Go to edit config page of VM.
```

![goto edit config page of VM](./imgs/goto_vm_edit_config_page.png)

> - Choose volume and Click `Check volume details`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Go to **Volumes** and select `Check volume details.`
```

![link to longhorn volume page](./imgs/link_to_longhorn_volume.png)

> - Attach this volume again.

Reviewer 2: Is there a name for this dropdown menu on the "Check volume details" page? 
![Screen Shot 2023-02-10 at 3 28 40 PM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/83089978/218221400-0fa2cbae-8c49-4be2-a062-2a23636af1bc.png)

Author: There is no name for this dropdown menu, only an icon here.
This page is the page that when we click the `Check volume details` would link to.

Author: hi @LucasSaintarbor, could you recheck this part?  Thanks!

> - Attach this volume again.

Reviewer 2: Go to `?` and select `Attach` to attach the volume again.

Author: Hmm, only a dropdown menu icon here. How about
`Click the dropdown menu on the right side and attach this volume again`?

Author: @LucasSaintarbor, ditto. Thanks for giving a review!

Reviewer 2: @Vicente-Cheng confirming if this is step good? Thanks

Author: hi @LucasSaintarbor.
Ah, I see it. We have already fixed it. Thanks!!

> - Attach this volume again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Click the dropdown menu on the right side and select 'Attach' to attach the volume again. 
```

![attach this volume again](./imgs/attach_this_volume_again.png)

> - Choose the attached node. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Select the attached node. 
```

![choose the attached node](./imgs/choose_the_attached_node.png)

- Check the volume attached and take snapshot on this volume page.

![take snapshot on volume page](./imgs/take_snapshot_on_volume_page.png)

> - Check the snapshot is ready.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Confirm that the snapshot is ready.
```

> - Check the snapshot is ready.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Confirm the snapshot is ready.
```

![check the snapshot is ready](./imgs/check_the_snapshot_is_ready.png)

> Now we complete the backup volume. Next, we scan and repair the root filesystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that you completed the volume backup, you need to scan and repair the root filesystem.
```

- Use the Filesystem toolbox image to scan and repair.

```
# docker run -it --rm --privileged registry.opensuse.org/isv/rancher/harvester/toolbox/main/fs-toolbox:latest -- bash
```

Then we try to scan with this target device.

### XFS

For XFS filesystem scanning, use `xfs_repair` as follows. The `/dev/sdd3` is the problematic partition of the device.

```
# xfs_repair -n /dev/sdd3
```

If you want to repair it, use the following command.

```
# xfs_repair /dev/sdd3
```

### EXT4

For EXT4 filesystem scanning, use `e2fsck` as follows. The `/dev/sde1` is the problematic partition of the device.

```
# e2fsck -f /dev/sde1
```

If you want to repair it, use the following command.

```
# e2fsck -fp /dev/sde1
```

You should also see some logs about scanning and repairing. Again, the scanning and repairing are successful if there is no error here.

## Detach and Start VM again.

After the scanning and repairing are all complete. Now we can detach the volume and try to start the related VM again.

- Detach volume on longhorn UI.

![detach volume on longhorn UI](./imgs/detach_volume.png)

- Start VM again.

![Start VM again](./imgs/start_vm_again.png)

> Now, your VM should work normally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your VM should now work normally.
```

slug: scan-and-repair-vm-root-filesystem
authors:
  - name: Vicente Cheng
    title: Senior Software Engineer
    url: https://github.com/Vicente-Cheng
    image_url: https://github.com/Vicente-Cheng.png
tags: [storage, longhorn, root, filesystem]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

In the early version of harvester (v1.0.3 and before versions), the longhorn volume sometimes corrupts when rebuilt (reference: [Analysis: Potential Data/Filesystem Corruption](https://longhorn.io/kb/troubleshooting-volume-filesystem-corruption/#solution)). In the harvester v1.1.0 and later versions, the longhorn team already fix this problem. Therefore, you could scan your filesystem of the VM by following the steps and repairing it (if needed).

## Stop The VM And Backup Volume

Before we scan the filesystem, we recommend you back up your volume. For example, refer to the following steps to stop the VM and backup the volumes.

- Find the target VM

![finding the target VM](./imgs/finding_the_target_vm.png)

- Stop the target VM

![Stop the target VM](./imgs/stop_the_target_vm.png)

Now, the VM stopped, and related volumes are detached. Then we go to the longhorn UI to backup this volume.

> - Find the related volume of VM. Then, attach it again for scanning.

Reviewer 3: Need a precise way to find the volume. One way is (for v1.1.1):
- Enable "Developer Tools & Features" (like https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.1/troubleshooting/harvester#access-embedded-rancher-and-longhorn-dashboards)
- Click VM for detail.
- Click the Volumes tab. There is an arrow icon called "check volume details", that should lead to LH volume page.
